README.md, before:

_`pgrwl` stream write-ahead logs from a PostgreSQL server_

**pgrwl** is a PostgreSQL write-ahead log (WAL) receiver written in Go. It’s a drop-in, container-friendly alternative
to `pg_receivewal`, supporting streaming replication, encryption, compression, and remote storage (S3, SFTP).

Designed for disaster recovery and PITR (Point-in-Time Recovery), `pgrwl` ensures zero data loss (RPO=0) and seamless
integration with Kubernetes environments.

[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/hashmap-kz/pgrwl)](https://github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/blob/master/LICENSE)
[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl)](https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl)
[![Workflow Status](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/ci.yml?branch=master)](https://github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/actions/workflows/ci.yml?query=branch:master)
[![GitHub Issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/hashmap-kz/pgrwl)](https://github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/issues)
[![Go Version](https://img.shields.io/github/go-mod/go-version/hashmap-kz/pgrwl)](https://github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/blob/master/go.mod#L3)
[![Latest Release](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/hashmap-kz/pgrwl)](https://github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/releases/latest)

---

## Table of Contents

- [About](#about)
- [Usage](#usage)
    - [Receive Mode](#receive-mode)
    - [Serve Mode](#serve-mode)
    - [Restore Command](#restore-command)
- [Quick Start](examples)
    - [Docker Compose (Basic Setup)](examples/docker-compose-quick-start/)
    - [Docker Compose (Archive And Recovery)](examples/docker-compose-recovery-example/)
    - [Kubernetes (all features: s3-storage, compression, encryption, retention, monitoring, etc...)](examples/k8s-quick-start/)
- [Configuration Reference](#configuration-reference)
- [Installation](#installation)
    - [Docker Images](#docker-images-are-available-at-quayiohashmap_kzpgrwl)
    - [Binaries](#manual-installation)
    - [Packages](#package-based-installation-suitable-in-cicd)
- [Disaster Recovery Use Cases](#disaster-recovery-use-cases)
- [Architecture](#architecture)
    - [Design Notes](#design-notes)
    - [Notes on `fsync`](#-notes-on-fsync-since-the-utility-works-in-synchronous-mode-only)
    - [Notes on `archive_command` and `archive_timeout`](#-notes-on-archive_command-and-archive_timeout)
- [Developer Notes](#developer-notes)
    - [Developer Postulates](#developer-postulates)
    - [Developer Experience](#developer-experience)
    - [Clarity of Purpose](#clarity-of-purpose)
    - [Observability](#observability)
    - [Integration Testing](#integration-testing)
    - [Verify build locally](#to-contribute-or-verify-the-project-locally-the-following-make-targets-should-all-pass)
    - [Source Code Structure](#source-code-structure)
    - [Main Loop Diagram](#main-loop)
    - [Links](#links)
- [License](#license)

---

## About

- The project serves as a **research platform** to explore streaming WAL archiving with a target of **RPO=0** during
  recovery.

- _It's primarily designed for use in containerized environments._

- The utility replicates all key features of `pg_receivewal`, including automatic reconnection on connection loss,
  streaming into partial files, extensive error checking and more.

- The tool is easy to install as a single binary and simple to debug - just use your preferred editor and a Docker
  container running PostgreSQL.

---

## Usage

**[`^        back to top        ^`](#table-of-contents)**

### Receive Mode

`Receive` mode is _the main loop of the WAL receiver_.

```bash
cat <<EOF >config.yml
main:
  listen_port: 7070
  directory: wals
receiver:
  slot: pgrwl_v5
log:
  level: trace
  format: text
  add_source: true
EOF

export PGHOST=localhost
export PGPORT=5432
export PGUSER=postgres
export PGPASSWORD=postgres
export PGRWL_MODE=receive

pgrwl -c config.yml
```

### Serve Mode

`Serve` mode is _used during restore to serve archived WAL files from storage_.

```bash
cat <<EOF >config.yml
main:
  listen_port: 7070
  directory: wals
log:
  level: trace
  format: text
  add_source: true
EOF

export PGRWL_MODE=serve

pgrwl -c config.yml
```

### Restore Command

`restore_command` example for postgresql.conf:

```
# where 'k8s-worker5:30266' represents the host and port
# of a 'pgrwl' instance running in 'serve' mode.
restore_command = 'pgrwl restore-command --serve-addr=k8s-worker5:30266 %f %p'
```

---

## Configuration Reference

**[`^        back to top        ^`](#table-of-contents)**

The configuration file is in JSON or YML format (\*.json is preferred).
It supports environment variable placeholders like `${PGRWL_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY}`.

```
main:                                    # Required for both modes: 'receive' / 'serve'
  listen_port: 7070                      # HTTP server port (used for management)
  directory: "/var/lib/pgwal"            # Base directory for storing WAL files

receiver:                                # Required for 'receive' mode
  slot: replication_slot                 # Replication slot to use
  no_loop: false                         # If true, do not loop on connection loss

uploader:                                # Optional (used in receive mode)
  sync_interval: 10s                     # Interval for the upload worker to check for new files
  max_concurrency: 4                     # Maximum number of files to upload concurrently

retention:                               # Optional (used in receive mode)
  enable: true                           # Perform retention rules
  sync_interval: 24h                     # Interval for the retention worker (shouldn't run frequently - 12h is typically sufficient)
  keep_period: 72h                       # Remove WAL files older than given period

metrics:
  enable: true                           # Optional (used in receive mode: http://host:port/metrics)

log:                                     # Optional
  level: info                            # One of: trace / debug / info / warn / error
  format: text                           # One of: text / json
  add_source: true                       # Include file:line in log messages (for local development)

storage:                                 # Optional
  name: s3                               # One of: s3 / sftp
  compression:                           # Optional
    algo: gzip                           # One of: gzip / zstd
  encryption:                            # Optional
    algo: aesgcm                         # One of: aes-256-gcm
    pass: "${PGRWL_ENCRYPT_PASSWD}"      # Encryption password (from env)
  sftp:                                  # Required section for 'sftp' storage
    host: sftp.example.com               # SFTP server hostname
    port: 22                             # SFTP server port
    user: backupuser                     # SFTP username
    pass: "${PGRWL_VM_PASSWORD}"         # SFTP password (from env)
    pkey_path: "/home/user/.ssh/id_rsa"  # Path to SSH private key (optional)
    pkey_pass: "${PGRWL_SSH_PKEY_PASS}"  # Required if the private key is password-protected
  s3:                                    # Required section for 's3' storage
    url: https://s3.example.com          # S3-compatible endpoint URL
    access_key_id: AKIAEXAMPLE           # AWS access key ID
    secret_access_key: "${PGRWL_AWS_SK}" # AWS secret access key (from env)
    bucket: postgres-backups             # Target S3 bucket name
    region: us-east-1                    # S3 region
    use_path_style: true                 # Use path-style URLs for S3
    disable_ssl: false                   # Disable SSL
```

---

## Installation

**[`^        back to top        ^`](#table-of-contents)**

### Docker images are available at [quay.io/hashmap_kz/pgrwl](https://quay.io/repository/hashmap_kz/pgrwl)

```
docker pull quay.io/hashmap_kz/pgrwl:latest
```

### Manual Installation

1. Download the latest binary for your platform from
   the [Releases page](https://github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/releases).
2. Place the binary in your system's `PATH` (e.g., `/usr/local/bin`).

### Installation script for Unix-Based OS _(requires: tar, curl, jq)_:

```bash
(
set -euo pipefail

OS="$(uname | tr '[:upper:]' '[:lower:]')"
ARCH="$(uname -m | sed -e 's/x86_64/amd64/' -e 's/\(arm\)\(64\)\?.*/\1\2/' -e 's/aarch64$/arm64/')"
TAG="$(curl -s https://api.github.com/repos/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/releases/latest | jq -r .tag_name)"

curl -L "https://github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/releases/download/${TAG}/pgrwl_${TAG}_${OS}_${ARCH}.tar.gz" |
tar -xzf - -C /usr/local/bin && \
chmod +x /usr/local/bin/pgrwl
)
```

### Package-Based installation (suitable in CI/CD)

#### Debian

```
sudo apt update -y && sudo apt install -y curl
curl -LO https://github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/releases/latest/download/pgrwl_linux_amd64.deb
sudo dpkg -i pgrwl_linux_amd64.deb
```

#### Apline Linux

```
apk update && apk add --no-cache bash curl
curl -LO https://github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/releases/latest/download/pgrwl_linux_amd64.apk
apk add pgrwl_linux_amd64.apk --allow-untrusted
```

---

## Disaster Recovery Use Cases

**[`^        back to top        ^`](#table-of-contents)**

_The full process may look like this (a typical, rough, and simplified example):_

- You have a cron job that performs a _base backup_ of your cluster every three days.
- You run `pgrwl` as a systemd unit or a Kubernetes pod (depending on your infrastructure).
- You have a configured retention worker that prunes WAL files older than three days.
- With this setup, you're able to restore your cluster - in the event of a crash - to any second within the past three
  days.

---

## Architecture

**[`^        back to top        ^`](#table-of-contents)**

### Design Notes

`pgrwl` is designed to **always stream WAL data to the local filesystem first**. This design ensures durability and
correctness, especially in synchronous replication setups where PostgreSQL waits for the replica to confirm the commit.

- Incoming WAL data is written directly to `*.partial` files in a local directory.
- These `*.partial` files are synced (`fsync`) after each write to ensure that WAL segments are fully durable on disk.
- Once a WAL segment is fully received, the `*.partial` suffix is removed, and the file is considered complete.

**Compression and encryption** are applied only after a WAL segment is completed:

- Completed files are passed to the uploader worker, which may compress and/or encrypt them before uploading to a remote
  backend (e.g., S3, SFTP).
- The uploader worker **ignores partial files** and operates only on finalized, closed segments.

This model avoids the complexity and risk of streaming incomplete WAL data directly to remote storage, which can lead to
inconsistencies or partial restores. By ensuring that all WAL files are locally durable and only completed files are
uploaded, `pgrwl` guarantees restore safety and clean segment handoff for disaster recovery.

In short: **PostgreSQL requires acknowledgments for commits in synchronous setups**, and relying on external systems for
critical paths (like WAL streaming) could introduce unacceptable delays or failures. This architecture mitigates that
risk.

### 💾 Notes on `fsync` (since the utility works in synchronous mode **only**):

- After each WAL segment is written, an `fsync` is performed on the currently open WAL file to ensure durability.
- An `fsync` is triggered when a WAL segment is completed and the `*.partial` file is renamed to its final form.
- An `fsync` is triggered when a keepalive message is received from the server with the `reply_requested` option set.
- Additionally, `fsync` is called whenever an error occurs during the receive-copy loop.

### 🔁 Notes on `archive_command` and `archive_timeout`

There’s a significant difference between using `archive_command` and archiving WAL files via the streaming replication
protocol.

The `archive_command` is triggered only after a WAL file is fully completed-typically when it reaches 16 MiB (the
default segment size). This means that in a crash scenario, you could lose up to 16 MiB of data.

You can mitigate this by setting a lower `archive_timeout` (e.g., 1 minute), but even then, in a worst-case scenario,
you risk losing up to 1 minute of data.
Also, it’s important to note that PostgreSQL preallocates WAL files to the configured `wal_segment_size`, so they are
created with full size regardless of how much data has been written. (Quote from documentation:
_It is therefore unwise to set a very short `archive_timeout` - it will bloat your archive storage._).

In contrast, streaming WAL archiving-when used with replication slots and the `synchronous_standby_names`
parameter-ensures that the system can be restored to the latest committed transaction.
This approach provides true zero data loss (**RPO=0**), making it ideal for high-durability requirements.

---

## Developer Notes

**[`^        back to top        ^`](#table-of-contents)**

### Developer Postulates

These principles guide the development of `pgrwl` to ensure long-term maintainability, ease of use, and operational
clarity:

- **Simplicity**: Prioritize simplicity in both development and usage. The system should be easy to run, understand, and
  extend.
- **Durability**: WAL files must be reliably persisted to prevent data loss - no compromises.
- **Predictability**: The application should behave consistently and transparently across different environments and
  scenarios.

### Developer Experience

- **Simple Configuration**: Users should be able to configure and launch the application with minimal effort - ideally
  with a single YAML file and a few environment variables.
- **Easy Debugging**: Troubleshooting should not require navigating complex dependencies. The system must produce
  helpful, traceable logs.

### Clarity of Purpose

- Anyone should be able to:
    - Understand what the application does.
    - Use it confidently without prior deep knowledge of PostgreSQL internals.
    - Contribute to it without needing to reverse-engineer its design.

### Observability

- **Structured Logging**: All logs use structured formats (e.g., JSON or text with context) and support verbose tracing
  when needed.
- **Metrics**: Prometheus-compatible metrics are exposed for observability, health checks, and integration with
  monitoring dashboards.

### Integration Testing:

Here an example of a 'golden' fundamental test.
It verifies that we can restore to the latest committed transaction after an abrupt system crash.
It also checks that the WAL files generated are byte-for-byte identical to those generated by `pg_receivewal`.

#### Test Steps:

- Initialize and start a PostgreSQL cluster
- Run WAL receivers (`pgrwl` and `pg_receivewal`)
- Create a base backup
- Create a table, and insert the current timestamp every second (in the background)
- Run pgbench to populate the database with 1 million rows
- Generate additional data (~512 MiB)
- Concurrently create 100 tables with 10000 rows each.
- Terminate the insert-script job
- Run pg_dumpall and save the output as plain SQL
- Terminate all PostgreSQL processes and delete the `PGDATA` directory (termination is force and abnormal)
- Restore `PGDATA` from the base backup, add recovery.signal, and configure restore_command
- Rename all `*.partial` WAL files in the WAL archive directories
- Start the PostgreSQL cluster (cluster should recover to the latest committed transaction)
- Run pg_dumpall after the cluster is ready
- Diff the pg_dumpall results (before and after)
- Check the insert-script logs and verify that the table contains the last inserted row
- Compare WAL directories (filenames and contents must match 100%)
- Clean up WAL directories and rerun the WAL archivers on a new timeline (cleanup is necessary since we run receivers
  with --no-loop option)
- Compare the WAL directories again

### To contribute or verify the project locally, the following `make` targets should all pass:

```
# Compile the project
make build

# Run linter (should pass without errors)
make lint

# Run unit tests (should all pass)
make test

# Run integration tests (slow, but critical)
# Requires Docker and Docker Compose to be installed
make test-integ-scripts

# Run GoReleaser builds locally
make snapshot
```

✅ All targets should complete successfully before submitting changes or opening a PR.

### Source Code Structure

```
internal/xlog/pg_receivewal.go
  → Entry point for WAL receiving logic.
    Based on the logic found in PostgreSQL:
    https://github.com/postgres/postgres/blob/master/src/bin/pg_basebackup/pg_receivewal.c

internal/xlog/receivelog.go
  → Core streaming loop and replication logic.
    Based on the logic found in PostgreSQL:
    https://github.com/postgres/postgres/blob/master/src/bin/pg_basebackup/receivelog.c

internal/xlog/xlog_internal.go
  → Helpers for LSN math, WAL file naming, segment calculations.
    Based on the logic found in PostgreSQL:
    https://github.com/postgres/postgres/blob/master/src/include/access/xlog_internal.h

internal/xlog/walfile.go
  → Manages WAL file descriptors: open, write, close, sync.

internal/xlog/streamutil.go
  → Utilities for querying server parameters (e.g. wal_segment_size),
    replication slot info, and streaming setup.

internal/xlog/fsync/
  → Optimized wrappers for safe and efficient `fsync` system calls.
```

### Main Loop

![main loop](assets/diagrams/loop.png)

### Links

- [pg_receivewal Documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-pgrwl.html)
- [pg_receivewal Source Code](https://github.com/postgres/postgres/blob/master/src/bin/pg_basebackup/pg_receivewal.c)
- [Streaming Replication Protocol](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/protocol-replication.html)
- [Continuous Archiving and Point-in-Time Recovery](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/continuous-archiving.html)
- [Setting Up WAL Archiving](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/continuous-archiving.html#BACKUP-ARCHIVING-WAL)

---

## License

MIT License. See [LICENSE](./LICENSE) for details.

Commit message:

Update README.md, add "Contributing" section

README.md, after:

_`pgrwl` stream write-ahead logs from a PostgreSQL server_

**pgrwl** is a PostgreSQL write-ahead log (WAL) receiver written in Go. It’s a drop-in, container-friendly alternative
to `pg_receivewal`, supporting streaming replication, encryption, compression, and remote storage (S3, SFTP).

Designed for disaster recovery and PITR (Point-in-Time Recovery), `pgrwl` ensures zero data loss (RPO=0) and seamless
integration with Kubernetes environments.

[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/hashmap-kz/pgrwl)](https://github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/blob/master/LICENSE)
[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl)](https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl)
[![Workflow Status](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/ci.yml?branch=master)](https://github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/actions/workflows/ci.yml?query=branch:master)
[![GitHub Issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/hashmap-kz/pgrwl)](https://github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/issues)
[![Go Version](https://img.shields.io/github/go-mod/go-version/hashmap-kz/pgrwl)](https://github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/blob/master/go.mod#L3)
[![Latest Release](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/hashmap-kz/pgrwl)](https://github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/releases/latest)

---

## Table of Contents

- [About](#about)
- [Usage](#usage)
    - [Receive Mode](#receive-mode)
    - [Serve Mode](#serve-mode)
    - [Restore Command](#restore-command)
- [Quick Start](examples)
    - [Docker Compose (Basic Setup)](examples/docker-compose-quick-start/)
    - [Docker Compose (Archive And Recovery)](examples/docker-compose-recovery-example/)
    - [Kubernetes (all features: s3-storage, compression, encryption, retention, monitoring, etc...)](examples/k8s-quick-start/)
- [Configuration Reference](#configuration-reference)
- [Installation](#installation)
    - [Docker Images](#docker-images-are-available-at-quayiohashmap_kzpgrwl)
    - [Binaries](#manual-installation)
    - [Packages](#package-based-installation-suitable-in-cicd)
- [Disaster Recovery Use Cases](#disaster-recovery-use-cases)
- [Architecture](#architecture)
    - [Design Notes](#design-notes)
    - [Notes on `fsync`](#-notes-on-fsync-since-the-utility-works-in-synchronous-mode-only)
    - [Notes on `archive_command` and `archive_timeout`](#-notes-on-archive_command-and-archive_timeout)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [Developer Notes](#developer-notes)
    - [Developer Postulates](#developer-postulates)
    - [Developer Experience](#developer-experience)
    - [Clarity of Purpose](#clarity-of-purpose)
    - [Observability](#observability)
    - [Integration Testing](#integration-testing)
    - [Verify build locally](#to-contribute-or-verify-the-project-locally-the-following-make-targets-should-all-pass)
    - [Source Code Structure](#source-code-structure)
    - [Main Loop Diagram](#main-loop)
    - [Links](#links)
- [License](#license)

---

## About

- The project serves as a **research platform** to explore streaming WAL archiving with a target of **RPO=0** during
  recovery.

- _It's primarily designed for use in containerized environments._

- The utility replicates all key features of `pg_receivewal`, including automatic reconnection on connection loss,
  streaming into partial files, extensive error checking and more.

- The tool is easy to install as a single binary and simple to debug - just use your preferred editor and a Docker
  container running PostgreSQL.

---

## Usage

**[`^        back to top        ^`](#table-of-contents)**

### Receive Mode

`Receive` mode is _the main loop of the WAL receiver_.

```bash
cat <<EOF >config.yml
main:
  listen_port: 7070
  directory: wals
receiver:
  slot: pgrwl_v5
log:
  level: trace
  format: text
  add_source: true
EOF

export PGHOST=localhost
export PGPORT=5432
export PGUSER=postgres
export PGPASSWORD=postgres
export PGRWL_MODE=receive

pgrwl -c config.yml
```

### Serve Mode

`Serve` mode is _used during restore to serve archived WAL files from storage_.

```bash
cat <<EOF >config.yml
main:
  listen_port: 7070
  directory: wals
log:
  level: trace
  format: text
  add_source: true
EOF

export PGRWL_MODE=serve

pgrwl -c config.yml
```

### Restore Command

`restore_command` example for postgresql.conf:

```
# where 'k8s-worker5:30266' represents the host and port
# of a 'pgrwl' instance running in 'serve' mode.
restore_command = 'pgrwl restore-command --serve-addr=k8s-worker5:30266 %f %p'
```

---

## Configuration Reference

**[`^        back to top        ^`](#table-of-contents)**

The configuration file is in JSON or YML format (\*.json is preferred).
It supports environment variable placeholders like `${PGRWL_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY}`.

```
main:                                    # Required for both modes: 'receive' / 'serve'
  listen_port: 7070                      # HTTP server port (used for management)
  directory: "/var/lib/pgwal"            # Base directory for storing WAL files

receiver:                                # Required for 'receive' mode
  slot: replication_slot                 # Replication slot to use
  no_loop: false                         # If true, do not loop on connection loss

uploader:                                # Optional (used in receive mode)
  sync_interval: 10s                     # Interval for the upload worker to check for new files
  max_concurrency: 4                     # Maximum number of files to upload concurrently

retention:                               # Optional (used in receive mode)
  enable: true                           # Perform retention rules
  sync_interval: 24h                     # Interval for the retention worker (shouldn't run frequently - 12h is typically sufficient)
  keep_period: 72h                       # Remove WAL files older than given period

metrics:
  enable: true                           # Optional (used in receive mode: http://host:port/metrics)

log:                                     # Optional
  level: info                            # One of: trace / debug / info / warn / error
  format: text                           # One of: text / json
  add_source: true                       # Include file:line in log messages (for local development)

storage:                                 # Optional
  name: s3                               # One of: s3 / sftp
  compression:                           # Optional
    algo: gzip                           # One of: gzip / zstd
  encryption:                            # Optional
    algo: aesgcm                         # One of: aes-256-gcm
    pass: "${PGRWL_ENCRYPT_PASSWD}"      # Encryption password (from env)
  sftp:                                  # Required section for 'sftp' storage
    host: sftp.example.com               # SFTP server hostname
    port: 22                             # SFTP server port
    user: backupuser                     # SFTP username
    pass: "${PGRWL_VM_PASSWORD}"         # SFTP password (from env)
    pkey_path: "/home/user/.ssh/id_rsa"  # Path to SSH private key (optional)
    pkey_pass: "${PGRWL_SSH_PKEY_PASS}"  # Required if the private key is password-protected
  s3:                                    # Required section for 's3' storage
    url: https://s3.example.com          # S3-compatible endpoint URL
    access_key_id: AKIAEXAMPLE           # AWS access key ID
    secret_access_key: "${PGRWL_AWS_SK}" # AWS secret access key (from env)
    bucket: postgres-backups             # Target S3 bucket name
    region: us-east-1                    # S3 region
    use_path_style: true                 # Use path-style URLs for S3
    disable_ssl: false                   # Disable SSL
```

---

## Installation

**[`^        back to top        ^`](#table-of-contents)**

### Docker images are available at [quay.io/hashmap_kz/pgrwl](https://quay.io/repository/hashmap_kz/pgrwl)

```
docker pull quay.io/hashmap_kz/pgrwl:latest
```

### Manual Installation

1. Download the latest binary for your platform from
   the [Releases page](https://github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/releases).
2. Place the binary in your system's `PATH` (e.g., `/usr/local/bin`).

### Installation script for Unix-Based OS _(requires: tar, curl, jq)_:

```bash
(
set -euo pipefail

OS="$(uname | tr '[:upper:]' '[:lower:]')"
ARCH="$(uname -m | sed -e 's/x86_64/amd64/' -e 's/\(arm\)\(64\)\?.*/\1\2/' -e 's/aarch64$/arm64/')"
TAG="$(curl -s https://api.github.com/repos/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/releases/latest | jq -r .tag_name)"

curl -L "https://github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/releases/download/${TAG}/pgrwl_${TAG}_${OS}_${ARCH}.tar.gz" |
tar -xzf - -C /usr/local/bin && \
chmod +x /usr/local/bin/pgrwl
)
```

### Package-Based installation (suitable in CI/CD)

#### Debian

```
sudo apt update -y && sudo apt install -y curl
curl -LO https://github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/releases/latest/download/pgrwl_linux_amd64.deb
sudo dpkg -i pgrwl_linux_amd64.deb
```

#### Apline Linux

```
apk update && apk add --no-cache bash curl
curl -LO https://github.com/hashmap-kz/pgrwl/releases/latest/download/pgrwl_linux_amd64.apk
apk add pgrwl_linux_amd64.apk --allow-untrusted
```

---

## Disaster Recovery Use Cases

**[`^        back to top        ^`](#table-of-contents)**

_The full process may look like this (a typical, rough, and simplified example):_

- You have a cron job that performs a _base backup_ of your cluster every three days.
- You run `pgrwl` as a systemd unit or a Kubernetes pod (depending on your infrastructure).
- You have a configured retention worker that prunes WAL files older than three days.
- With this setup, you're able to restore your cluster - in the event of a crash - to any second within the past three
  days.

---

## Architecture

**[`^        back to top        ^`](#table-of-contents)**

### Design Notes

`pgrwl` is designed to **always stream WAL data to the local filesystem first**. This design ensures durability and
correctness, especially in synchronous replication setups where PostgreSQL waits for the replica to confirm the commit.

- Incoming WAL data is written directly to `*.partial` files in a local directory.
- These `*.partial` files are synced (`fsync`) after each write to ensure that WAL segments are fully durable on disk.
- Once a WAL segment is fully received, the `*.partial` suffix is removed, and the file is considered complete.

**Compression and encryption** are applied only after a WAL segment is completed:

- Completed files are passed to the uploader worker, which may compress and/or encrypt them before uploading to a remote
  backend (e.g., S3, SFTP).
- The uploader worker **ignores partial files** and operates only on finalized, closed segments.

This model avoids the complexity and risk of streaming incomplete WAL data directly to remote storage, which can lead to
inconsistencies or partial restores. By ensuring that all WAL files are locally durable and only completed files are
uploaded, `pgrwl` guarantees restore safety and clean segment handoff for disaster recovery.

In short: **PostgreSQL requires acknowledgments for commits in synchronous setups**, and relying on external systems for
critical paths (like WAL streaming) could introduce unacceptable delays or failures. This architecture mitigates that
risk.

### 💾 Notes on `fsync` (since the utility works in synchronous mode **only**):

- After each WAL segment is written, an `fsync` is performed on the currently open WAL file to ensure durability.
- An `fsync` is triggered when a WAL segment is completed and the `*.partial` file is renamed to its final form.
- An `fsync` is triggered when a keepalive message is received from the server with the `reply_requested` option set.
- Additionally, `fsync` is called whenever an error occurs during the receive-copy loop.

### 🔁 Notes on `archive_command` and `archive_timeout`

There’s a significant difference between using `archive_command` and archiving WAL files via the streaming replication
protocol.

The `archive_command` is triggered only after a WAL file is fully completed-typically when it reaches 16 MiB (the
default segment size). This means that in a crash scenario, you could lose up to 16 MiB of data.

You can mitigate this by setting a lower `archive_timeout` (e.g., 1 minute), but even then, in a worst-case scenario,
you risk losing up to 1 minute of data.
Also, it’s important to note that PostgreSQL preallocates WAL files to the configured `wal_segment_size`, so they are
created with full size regardless of how much data has been written. (Quote from documentation:
_It is therefore unwise to set a very short `archive_timeout` - it will bloat your archive storage._).

In contrast, streaming WAL archiving-when used with replication slots and the `synchronous_standby_names`
parameter-ensures that the system can be restored to the latest committed transaction.
This approach provides true zero data loss (**RPO=0**), making it ideal for high-durability requirements.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcomed and greatly appreciated. See [CONTRIBUTING.md](./CONTRIBUTING.md)
for details on submitting patches and the contribution workflow.

---

## Developer Notes

**[`^        back to top        ^`](#table-of-contents)**

### Developer Postulates

These principles guide the development of `pgrwl` to ensure long-term maintainability, ease of use, and operational
clarity:

- **Simplicity**: Prioritize simplicity in both development and usage. The system should be easy to run, understand, and
  extend.
- **Durability**: WAL files must be reliably persisted to prevent data loss - no compromises.
- **Predictability**: The application should behave consistently and transparently across different environments and
  scenarios.

### Developer Experience

- **Simple Configuration**: Users should be able to configure and launch the application with minimal effort - ideally
  with a single YAML file and a few environment variables.
- **Easy Debugging**: Troubleshooting should not require navigating complex dependencies. The system must produce
  helpful, traceable logs.

### Clarity of Purpose

- Anyone should be able to:
    - Understand what the application does.
    - Use it confidently without prior deep knowledge of PostgreSQL internals.
    - Contribute to it without needing to reverse-engineer its design.

### Observability

- **Structured Logging**: All logs use structured formats (e.g., JSON or text with context) and support verbose tracing
  when needed.
- **Metrics**: Prometheus-compatible metrics are exposed for observability, health checks, and integration with
  monitoring dashboards.

### Integration Testing:

Here an example of a 'golden' fundamental test.
It verifies that we can restore to the latest committed transaction after an abrupt system crash.
It also checks that the WAL files generated are byte-for-byte identical to those generated by `pg_receivewal`.

#### Test Steps:

- Initialize and start a PostgreSQL cluster
- Run WAL receivers (`pgrwl` and `pg_receivewal`)
- Create a base backup
- Create a table, and insert the current timestamp every second (in the background)
- Run pgbench to populate the database with 1 million rows
- Generate additional data (~512 MiB)
- Concurrently create 100 tables with 10000 rows each.
- Terminate the insert-script job
- Run pg_dumpall and save the output as plain SQL
- Terminate all PostgreSQL processes and delete the `PGDATA` directory (termination is force and abnormal)
- Restore `PGDATA` from the base backup, add recovery.signal, and configure restore_command
- Rename all `*.partial` WAL files in the WAL archive directories
- Start the PostgreSQL cluster (cluster should recover to the latest committed transaction)
- Run pg_dumpall after the cluster is ready
- Diff the pg_dumpall results (before and after)
- Check the insert-script logs and verify that the table contains the last inserted row
- Compare WAL directories (filenames and contents must match 100%)
- Clean up WAL directories and rerun the WAL archivers on a new timeline (cleanup is necessary since we run receivers
  with --no-loop option)
- Compare the WAL directories again

### To contribute or verify the project locally, the following `make` targets should all pass:

```
# Compile the project
make build

# Run linter (should pass without errors)
make lint

# Run unit tests (should all pass)
make test

# Run integration tests (slow, but critical)
# Requires Docker and Docker Compose to be installed
make test-integ-scripts

# Run GoReleaser builds locally
make snapshot
```

✅ All targets should complete successfully before submitting changes or opening a PR.

### Source Code Structure

```
internal/xlog/pg_receivewal.go
  → Entry point for WAL receiving logic.
    Based on the logic found in PostgreSQL:
    https://github.com/postgres/postgres/blob/master/src/bin/pg_basebackup/pg_receivewal.c

internal/xlog/receivelog.go
  → Core streaming loop and replication logic.
    Based on the logic found in PostgreSQL:
    https://github.com/postgres/postgres/blob/master/src/bin/pg_basebackup/receivelog.c

internal/xlog/xlog_internal.go
  → Helpers for LSN math, WAL file naming, segment calculations.
    Based on the logic found in PostgreSQL:
    https://github.com/postgres/postgres/blob/master/src/include/access/xlog_internal.h

internal/xlog/walfile.go
  → Manages WAL file descriptors: open, write, close, sync.

internal/xlog/streamutil.go
  → Utilities for querying server parameters (e.g. wal_segment_size),
    replication slot info, and streaming setup.

internal/xlog/fsync/
  → Optimized wrappers for safe and efficient `fsync` system calls.
```

### Main Loop

![main loop](assets/diagrams/loop.png)

### Links

- [pg_receivewal Documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-pgrwl.html)
- [pg_receivewal Source Code](https://github.com/postgres/postgres/blob/master/src/bin/pg_basebackup/pg_receivewal.c)
- [Streaming Replication Protocol](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/protocol-replication.html)
- [Continuous Archiving and Point-in-Time Recovery](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/continuous-archiving.html)
- [Setting Up WAL Archiving](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/continuous-archiving.html#BACKUP-ARCHIVING-WAL)

---

## License

MIT License. See [LICENSE](./LICENSE) for details.
